Breaking changes flag flip (#9242)
fishtown-analytics/docs.getdbt.com: website/docs/reference/global-configs/behavior-flag-maturity.md

Several behavior change flags are planned to reach maturity on the <Constant name="dbt_platform" /> **Latest** release track, which will switch their default values from `false` to `true`. For intro dates, refer to the [dbt Core behavior changes](/reference/global-configs/behavior-changes#dbt-core-behavior-changes) table.

| Flag | Impact |
|---|---|
| [`skip_nodes_if_on_run_start_fails`](#skip_nodes_if_on_run_start_fails) | Can stop build |
| [`require_nested_cumulative_type_params`](#require_nested_cumulative_type_params) | Can stop build (parse error) |
| [`require_all_warnings_handled_by_warn_error`](#require_all_warnings_handled_by_warn_error) | Can stop build (when `--warn-error` is set) |
| [`require_batched_execution_for_custom_microbatch_strategy`](#require_batched_execution_for_custom_microbatch_strategy) | Behavior change for custom microbatch macros |
| [`state_modified_compare_more_unrendered_values`](#state_modified_compare_more_unrendered_values) | Selection-set change with potential CI impact |
| [`require_yaml_configuration_for_mf_time_spines`](#require_yaml_configuration_for_mf_time_spines) | Suppresses a deprecation warning (no functional change) |

> | [`validate_macro_args`](#validate_macro_args) | New warning for mismatched macro arguments |

Reviewer: Hiya Bianca,

The table says "New warning" but the Notion impact doc and the section below, these warnings use the force-handled path — with `--warn-error` they become parse-time errors, not just warnings. Should this column be updated to reflect that, e.g. "New warning (errors with --warn-error)"?

Author: Rephrased here: https://github.com/dbt-labs/docs.getdbt.com/pull/9242/commits/9e9b3de8911a780abb5a1cbea7eb4fe5e494ebaa

### `require_all_warnings_handled_by_warn_error`

This only affects projects that use `warn_error: true` or `--warn-error` &mdash; common in CI or in <Constant name="dbt_platform" /> production jobs configured for strict mode. Projects without `--warn-error` are not affected.

Example warnings that switch from "log only" to "error" for `warn_error: true` users after the flag matures:

- `JinjaLogWarning` — emitted for column types declared for non-existent seed columns
- `WarnStateTargetEqual` — emitted when the `--state` and `--target` directories are the same path
- `SelectExcludeIgnoredWithSelectorWarning` — emitted when the legacy `--selector` flag is combined with `--select` or `--exclude`
- `RunResultWarningMessage` — emitted when a test or model returns `WARN` status
- Various adapter-level warnings not previously handled by `--warn-error`

Note that enabling this for projects that use `--warn-error` may cause builds to fail on warnings that were previously ignored. We recommend enabling it gradually.

> <Expandable alt_header="Recommended steps to enable the flag">

Reviewer: Hiya Bianca

The rollout steps are helpful, but they read like pre-flip opt-in ("when setting the flag to true"). After maturity the flag defaults to true on **Latest** — could we reframe this for customers who've already been flipped (e.g. "if you're seeing new failures after upgrade" or "to test before the **Latest** track flip, opt in early in dev")?

Author: Rephrased here: https://github.com/dbt-labs/docs.getdbt.com/pull/9242/commits/9e9b3de8911a780abb5a1cbea7eb4fe5e494ebaa

---
title: "Behavior flag maturity and impact"
id: "behavior-flag-maturity"
sidebar: "Behavior flag maturity"
---

Several behavior change flags are planned to reach maturity in <Constant name="core" /> v1.12 and on the <Constant name="dbt_platform" /> **Latest** release track, which will switch their default values from `false` to `true`. This page describes what each change means for your project and what action, if any, you need to take.

To preserve the legacy behavior for any flag, set it explicitly to `false` in your `dbt_project.yml` before upgrading:

> 

Reviewer 2: > before upgrading:

Since they're on release tracks, they don't have manual upgrade. Maybe we should fix a deadline with product team and add it here. What do you think @graciegoheen ?

Reviewer 3: That's fine with me

<File name='macros/materialization_view.sql'>

```sql
{% materialization view, snowflake %}
  {{ return(my_installed_package_name.materialization_view_snowflake()) }}
{% endmaterialization %}
```

</File>

In the future, we may extend the project-level [`dispatch` configuration](/reference/project-configs/dispatch-config) to support a list of authorized packages for overriding built-in materialization.

### `require_resource_names_without_spaces`

dbt now raises an error if it detects a space in a resource name, rather than a deprecation warning. Resource names should contain letters, numbers, and underscores only.

<File name='models/model name with spaces.sql'>

```sql
-- This model file should be renamed to model_name_with_underscores.sql
```

</File>

### `source_freshness_run_project_hooks`

Project hooks ([`on-run-start` / `on-run-end`](/reference/project-configs/on-run-start-on-run-end)) now run as part of the `dbt source freshness` command by default. If you have hooks that should not run before or after `dbt source freshness`, add a conditional check:

<File name='dbt_project.yml'>

```yaml
on-run-start:

>   - '{{ ... if flags.WHICH != 'freshness' }}'

Reviewer 3: this shows up strangely for me 

<img width="312" height="211" alt="Image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/b4d22012-cf4a-44e0-ab73-899774cf56ea" />

If you are on an older Core version where the flag is `false`, dbt will recognize the `arguments` property but raise the `ArgumentsPropertyInGenericTestDeprecation` warning.

Here's an example using the new `arguments` property:

<File name='model.yml'>

```yaml
models:
  - name: my_model_with_generic_test
    data_tests:
      - dbt_utils.expression_is_true:
          arguments:
            expression: "order_items_subtotal = subtotal"
```

</File>

Here's an example using the alternative `test_name` format:

<File name='model.yml'>

```yaml
models:
  - name: my_model_with_generic_test
    data_tests:
    - name: arbitrary_name
      test_name: dbt_utils.expression_is_true
      arguments:
         expression: "order_items_subtotal = subtotal"
      config:
        where: "1=1"
```

</File>

With this flag enabled, dbt will:
- Parse any key-value pairs under `arguments` in generic tests as inputs to the generic test macro.
- Raise a `MissingArgumentsPropertyInGenericTestDeprecation` warning if additional non-config arguments are specified outside of the `arguments` property.

## Flags reaching maturity

> Several behavior change flags are planned to reach maturity on the <Constant name="dbt_platform" /> **Latest** release track, which will switch their default values from `false` to `true`. For intro dates, refer to the [dbt Core behavior changes](/reference/global-configs/behavior-changes#dbt-core-behavior-changes) table.

Reviewer 3: timeline?

| [`state_modified_compare_more_unrendered_values`](#state_modified_compare_more_unrendered_values) | Selection-set change with potential CI impact |
| [`require_yaml_configuration_for_mf_time_spines`](#require_yaml_configuration_for_mf_time_spines) | Suppresses a deprecation warning (no functional change) |
| [`validate_macro_args`](#validate_macro_args) | New warning for mismatched macro arguments |

To retain the legacy behavior after these flags reach maturity, set them to `false` in your `dbt_project.yml`:

<File name='dbt_project.yml'>

```yml
flags:
  skip_nodes_if_on_run_start_fails: false
  require_nested_cumulative_type_params: false
  require_all_warnings_handled_by_warn_error: false
  require_batched_execution_for_custom_microbatch_strategy: false
  state_modified_compare_more_unrendered_values: false
  require_yaml_configuration_for_mf_time_spines: false
  validate_macro_args: false
```

</File>

### `skip_nodes_if_on_run_start_fails`

<div style={{display: 'grid', gridTemplateColumns: 'repeat(auto-fit, minmax(300px, 1fr))', gap: '16px', marginBottom: '20px'}}>

<div>

> <h4 style={{marginTop: 0}}>Previous behavior (`false`)</h4>

Reviewer 3: Do we want to use this same "previous behavior" and "new behavior" format for all behavior change flags? It was weird to me that this section didn't follow the same format as the rest (they have redundant callouts on the other behavior change flag page, but in a different format)

- The macro errors because it expects a single invocation per run.
- Row counts in the destination table differ between flag values.

Projects without a custom microbatch macro are unaffected; the built-in macro already runs in batches.

<Expandable alt_header="Recommended actions">

If a microbatch model errors mid-run, produces duplicate rows or `MERGE`/`INSERT` conflicts, or reprocesses the full date range for every batch, check whether the `get_incremental_microbatch_sql` macro filters by the `event_time_start` / `event_time_end` window. If it uses a hard-coded date filter (for example, `here event_ts >= current_date - interval '1 day'`) or reads only `_dbt_max_partition`, the macro ignores the per-batch window and reprocesses the full range on every iteration.

To fix, rewrite the macro to use the per-batch window. For example:

```sql
{% macro get_incremental_microbatch_sql(arg_dict) %}
    {%- set target = arg_dict["target_relation"] -%}
    {%- set source = arg_dict["temp_relation"] -%}
    {%- set event_time = arg_dict["incremental_predicates"] -%}

>     -- Use the per-batch window dbt passes in via event_time_start/event_time_end

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
    -- Use the per-batch window dbt passes via event_time_start/event_time_end
```

    -- (exposed through arg_dict["incremental_predicates"] or model.config.event_time_*),
    -- NOT a hard-coded date filter.
    insert into {{ target }}
    select * from {{ source }}
{% endmacro %}
```

> To verify, run `dbt run --event-time-start <date> --event-time-end <date> -s <model>` for a single batch and confirm the row count matches that one day.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
To verify, run `dbt run --event-time-start <date> --event-time-end <date> -s <model>` for a single batch and confirm the row count matches that single day.
```

To opt out of this behavior, set the flag to `false`:

<File name='dbt_project.yml'>

```yaml
flags:
  require_batched_execution_for_custom_microbatch_strategy: false
```

</File>

</Expandable>

### `state_modified_compare_more_unrendered_values`

> Flipping the default to `true` for this flag silently changes the `state:modified` selection set that most CI, Slim CI, and `dbt build --defer` workflows rely on. There are two ways this surfaces:

Reviewer 4: Not sure if "flip" will translate down the road
```suggestion
Setting the default to `true` for this flag silently changes the `state:modified` selection set that most CI, Slim CI, and `dbt build --defer` workflows rely on. There are two ways this surfaces:
```

> - **False "modified" on the first run after the flag flips.** If the baseline manifest was captured before the flag flipped (rendered values stored) and the current parse runs after the flip (literal text stored), every node whose YAML config contains Jinja will appear as `state:modified`, even if nothing has changed. This causes a full rebuild on the first CI run after the upgrade.

Reviewer 4: See above
```suggestion
- **False "modified" on the first run after the flag is set to `true`.** If the baseline manifest was captured before the flag is set (rendered values stored) and the current parse runs after the setting change (literal text stored), every node whose YAML config contains Jinja will appear as `state:modified`, even if nothing has changed. This causes a full rebuild on the first CI run after the upgrade.
```

- **New positives going forward.** After both manifests are captured with the flag enabled, `state:modified` will catch cases where two equivalent Jinja expressions render to the same value (for example, switching from `"{{ env_var('MAT', 'view') }}"` to `view`).

<Expandable alt_header="What to expect">

> On the first CI or Slim CI run after the flag flips, any node whose YAML config uses Jinja (`env_var`, `var`, conditional materialization) may appear as `state:modified` even if nothing changed. This is because the baseline manifest stored rendered values while the new parse stores literal Jinja text &mdash; the two sides of the comparison differ on serialization, not on real changes. 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
On the first CI or Slim CI run after the flag is set, any node whose YAML config uses Jinja (`env_var`, `var`, conditional materialization) may appear as `state:modified` even if nothing changed. This is because the baseline manifest stored rendered values while the new parse stores literal Jinja text &mdash; the two sides of the comparison differ on serialization, not on real changes. 
```
